Simulated example dataset and sample code for calculating the AUC in the presence of dependent censoring caused by treatment, using auxiliary information from multiple longitudinal risk factors. Codes are developed by extending those in Brilleman et. al (2018) and R package JM.

Zhang C, Ning J, Belle S H, Squires R H, Cai J, Li R. (2022+) Assessing Predictive Discrimination Performance of Biomarkers in the Presence of Treatment-induced Dependent Censoring. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C. Accepted.

In medical studies, some therapeutic decisions could lead to dependent censoring for the survival outcome of interest. This is exemplified by a study of pediatric acute liver failure, where death was subject to dependent censoring due to liver transplantation. Existing methods for assessing the predictive performance of biomarkers often pose the independent censoring assumption and are thus not applicable. In this work, we propose to tackle the dependence between the failure event and dependent censoring event using auxiliary information in multiple longitudinal risk factors. We propose estimators of sensitivity, specificity, and area under curve, to discern the predictive power of biomarkers for the failure event by removing the disturbance of dependent censoring. Point estimation and inferential procedures were developed by adopting the joint modeling framework. The proposed methods performed satisfactorily in extensive simulation studies. We applied them to examine the predictive value of various biomarkers and risk scores for mortality in the motivating example.
